This folder contains the results for the SD plots analysis in the season 2020S.

NOTE: Due to the ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, only very few sequences are available for the 2020S season for both H3N2 and pH1N1. All results presented here should therefore be taken with caution, as they might not be representative for the whole viral population.

HA sequences for the influenza subtypes H3N2 and pH1N1 were downloaded from GISAID on September 10, 2020, including all data from the beginning of the 2014S season (April 1st, 2014). Phylogenetic trees were generated and rooted with a strain that was predominant previously (A/Fujian/411/2002 for H3N2 and A/California/07/2009 for pH1N1). SD plots were inferred and can be found [here for H3N2](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Recommendation%20in%202020S%20for%202021S/H3N2_2020S.significant_positions.png) and [here for pH1N1](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Recommendation%20in%202020S%20for%202021S/pH1N1_2020S.significant_positions.png).

For the recommendation of a vaccine update, only substitutions identified in the current season (i.e. 2020S) are of relevance. For H3N2, no significant changes were identified in 2020S. For this reason, we don't recommend a vaccine update for season 2021S.

For pH1N1, we identified K130N, N156K, L161I, T186A and V250A as significant changes. Position 156 (159 in H3N2 numbering) and position 186 (189 in H3N2 numbering) have previously been reported to induce [major antigenic changes and have been detected in antigenic patches](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Antigenicity%20or%20avidity%20changing%20sites.xlsx). We therefore recommend a vaccine update for season 2021S to include a representative strain of the subclade that includes the changes K130N, N156K, L161I, T186A and V250A.
