This folder contains the results for the SD plots analysis in the season 2017S.

HA sequences for the influenza subtypes H3N2 and pH1N1 were downloaded from GISAID on September 8, 2017, including all data from the beginning of the 2010S season (April 1st, 2010).
Phylogenetic trees were generated and rooted with the strain that was predominant the year before (A/Perth/16/2009 for H3N2 and A/California/05/2009 for pH1N1). SD plots were inferred and can be found [here for H3N2](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Recommendation%20in%202017S%20for%202018S/H3N2_2017S.significant_positions.png) and [here for pH1N1](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Recommendation%20in%202017S%20for%202018S/pH1N1_2017S.significant_positions.png).

For the recommendation of a vaccine update, only substitutions identified in the current season (i.e. 2017S) are of relevance. For H3N2, no significant changes were identified in 2017S. pH1N1 showed three significant changes: S74R, I295V and I321V (in H3N2 numbering: insertion between sites 82 and 83, 297, and 323). These sites are not included in the [list of known antigenicity or avidity changing sites](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Antigenicity%20or%20avidity%20changing%20sites.xlsx) which we have used in the SD plots study for the evaluation and are not located in the head region of the HA protein ([structure shown here](https://github.com/hzi-bifo/SDplots_VaccineUpdates/blob/master/Recommendation%20in%202017S%20for%202018S/pH1N1_2017S_structure.png)).

For this reason, we don't recommend a vaccine update for season 2018S. However, it should be noted that the antigenicity and avidity changing sites that we use for the evaluation have been experimentally identified for the H3N2 subtype and don't necessarily have the same function in the pH1N1 virus. To our knowledge, there are no comprehensive studies of antigenicity or avidity altering sites in the pH1N1 virus yet, which makes the evaluation of observed sites in the SD plots difficult for this subtype and the recommendation should be taken with caution.
